[Music]
so picture this or look at the picture
one day you're on a relaxing stroll
through the woods taking in the fresh
morning air the only sounds are chirping
birds swaying branches overhead and the
crunch of leaves under your feet
suddenly your relaxation is interrupted
by the sound of twigs snapping behind
you you turn around and are suddenly
face-to-face with a grizzly bear the
size of your car now what are you gonna
do a compliment him on his coat bee say
my what bright shiny teeth you have or
see introduce the bear to your much
slower companion while you skedaddle not
to worry because I'm here to tell you
exactly how to survive a surprise visit
from Yogi's bigger cousin bears live
throughout the world from Canada to the
Andes and northern Europe to Southeast
Asia
these intelligent muscular omnivores
usually prefer to keep their distance
from humans but can be a serious threat
on the rare occasion when they turn
violent now the best way to prevent bear
attacks is to avoid direct contact with
the animals as much as possible duh yeah
this might seem like a no-brainer but
whenever you plan a weekend outing it's
essential to check if there are any
known bear habitats in the area you
intend to visit if it turns out bears do
inhabit your planned hiking route then
preparation is in order
bears aren't evil creatures and their
attacks are extremely rare on average
there are only about 3 fatal attacks per
year
this puts bears well behind sharks
wolves and even vending machines is that
where the term vendetta comes from I'll
write you machine you got my brother now
I'm gonna get you know in fact bears
generally try to avoid humans when we
come near it's very common for hikers
and campers to come within a few hundred
feet of a bear and never know it this
might sound like a cliche but they
really are more afraid of you than you
are of them when bears turn violent it's
usually because they're surprised and
frightened or trying to protect their
cubs they tend to be most active during
the day when they're out foraging for
food although some breeds are nocturnal
bears also prefer following trails and
clearings to forcing their way through
the brush so if you remain alert the
odds of sneaking up on one by accident
are pretty small if you're camping or
taking a multi-day hike some
jurisdictions require you to store food
in a bear proof container specialized
cans that Bears are unable to open
another good piece of advice is to keep
toothpaste out of your tent many species
of bear are known to be attracted to the
smell a little bit of morning breath is
worth it if it means keeping your summer
activities bear free these are all
excellent ways to avoid surprise bear
encounters but sometimes prevention just
as impossible and you find yourself in a
hairy situation if you're a responsible
wilderness explorer you already research
bear behavior before you ventured out
and know how your new furry friend is
going to react if you've stumbled upon a
family of black bears
you're in luck well sort of these
smaller breeds prefer to avoid conflict
whenever possible and will usually
retreat when threatened instead of
becoming aggressive these bears are
excellent climbers and will use this
ability to their advantage scaling a
nearby tree to avoid danger if you run
into one there's a decent chance it'll
be long gone before you've even had time
to react
black bears account for most of the bear
encounters in the United States since
they tend to be more adventurous when it
comes to entering human areas thanks to
their skittish nature they tend to be
seen as more of a nuisance than a threat
that said bears have been known to
injured dogs they've tried to follow
them deeper into the woods so keep a
tight grip on fidos leash whenever
you're out and about with your best
friend brown bears on the other hand
including the infamous North American
grizzly tend to be much more aggressive
when threatened well they wouldn't
usually turn hostile at the sight of
people hikers still need to be careful
when one approaches bears are curious
animals and once the initial shock has
worn
they'll often approach whatever spoke
them to determine if it poses a threat
this isn't an inherently aggressive
gesture but can be intimidating so just
remember to stay calm and keep your wits
about you if you're in a group which is
always a good idea in bear country stay
together if you pack bear repellent put
it in your hand with the safety off but
don't make any aggressive moves instead
back away slowly while speaking in a
calm clear voice usually this will be
enough to diffuse the situation and the
bear will retreat once it feels
confident you aren't an active threat in
the rare cases that the bear holds its
ground you may be better off picking a
new path since confrontation is the last
thing either of you wants now if you
absolutely need to get past an hour 100%
sure you're dealing with a black bear
you might consider trying to move it out
of the way this can be done by looking
the bear in the eye and firmly telling
it to leave excuse me mister bear you
need to leave right now well a bear
isn't going to understand your words
your tone can convey a lot of
information as long as it has a clear
direction in which to retreat it should
take the hint and get out of your way
again only do this if you're entirely
and without a doubt positive that you're
dealing with a black bear brown bears
will not take your aggressive tone very
well and in the wild it can be much more
difficult to tell them apart than you
might think just by the names black
bears can be brown and brown bears can
be black so unless you're the kind of
expert who probably doesn't need this
guide anyway it's better not to take
your chances but what happens if the
bear starts behaving aggressively what
do you do when they begin swatting at
the ground and snorting angrily they
might even make a few threatening lunges
in your general direction oh boy this
sort of behavior generally happens in
one of three situations the bear is
either defending Cubs protecting its
food or is spooked and you're way too
close for comfort regardless of the
reason your next steps will be the same
quickly and calm
back away preferably in the direction
you just came from most of the time that
will be enough but if the bear starts to
come after you this is where the
repellent comes in you never want to
escalate the situation if you don't have
to but that spray is your best defense
if the bear decides it means business
don't go firing it off on a bluff but if
the bear comes within 20 or 30 feet give
it a good blast aim just above its head
that should guarantee the spray gets in
the Bears eyes nose and throat forcing
it to back off if you're too close for
that to work it might be time to play
dead by laying on your stomach and
covering the back of your head and neck
in most cases that's all you need to do
very rarely though the bear won't just
appear aggressive it might actually be
aggressive if it continues to follow you
even as you back away it's time to think
about fighting back like right now look
the bear in the eyes and shout while
making yourself look bigger stamp your
feet on the ground and maybe even take a
step or two towards it if there's a
stick nearby grab it and brandish it
threatening Lee or doing the same thing
with your bear repellent your goal is to
show the bear that you'll fight if
attacked so you can't let it intimidate
you if the bear moves in to attack use
the spray and start hitting it with
anything you can get your hand on kick
it punch it insult it smother hit it
with a stick or a rock focus on the eyes
and nose and do whatever you have to
because at this point you're fighting
for your life as I've already said this
kind of attack is incredibly rare but
can't happen so you need to come
prepared what's important is not letting
the situation escalate to that point a
vast majority of bear encounters never
turn violent and very few even come
close
they aren't aggressive under normal
circumstances so a lot has to go wrong
before you find yourself locked in
battle always remember to remain calm
keep your distance and back away from
any fight that isn't completely
unavoidable barely so now you know what
to do if your weekend hike attracts some
not entirely wanted attention
now that you've prepared
and off fuzzy danger what outdoor
activity is your favorite let me know
down in the comments if you learned
something new today then give this video
a like and share it with a friend but
hey don't go getting attacked by a
vending machine just yet
we have over 2,000 cool videos for you
to check out just click on this left or
right video and enjoy stay on the bright
side of life